[WIP] NFL tutorial draft (#187)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/tutorials/nfl-analytics/ingest-and-query.md

## Ingest data and run your first query

The main dataset is provided by [Kaggle as multiple CSV files][kaggle-download]. 
Additionally, we have gathered [other information about stadiums and the outcome 
of each game][extra-download] to provide you with additional data to analyze.

The data is provided in multiple CSV files, each corresponding to a table in the database
that contains the following information:

* **game**
  * Information about each game (home team, visitor team, week of play, etc.)
  * `game_id` is a primary key

* **player**
  * Player information (display_name, college, position, etc.)

>   * `player_id` is a primary_key. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `player_id` is a primary key. 
```

Or:

```suggestion
  * `player_id` is a `primary_key`. 
```

* **play**

>   * Play information (game, play, quarter, down, pass result, etc). _Lots_ of good

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Play information (game, play, quarter, down, pass result). Lots of good
```

  overall play information to analyze.
  * To query a specific play, you need to use `gameid` and `playid` together, as some 
  `playid`'s are reused from game-to-game.

* **tracking**
  * Player tracking information from each play sampled multiple times a second.
  * Fields include acceleration, X/Y coordinates on the field, and others.
  * `x` and `y` indicate the physical positions of the players on the field using 
  the coordinates outlined in the data description on the Kaggle website.
  * This is the largest table (18M+ row) in the database.

* **scores**
  * Final result of each game.
  * This table can be joined with the tracking table using the `home_team_abb` and 
  `visitor_team_abb` fields.

* **stadium_info**
  * Home stadium of each team and additional information like `surface`, `roof_type`, `location`.

> Create the tables with the following SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the tables with this SQL:
```

import psycopg2

# connect to the database
conn = psycopg2.connect(database=config.DB_NAME, 
                        host=config.HOST, 
                        user=config.USER, 
                        password=config.PASS, 
                        port=config.PORT)

# insert CSV file into given table
def insert(csv_file, table_name):
    cur = conn.cursor()
    copy_sql = """
            COPY {table} FROM stdin WITH CSV HEADER
            DELIMITER as ','
            """.format(table=table_name)
    with open(csv_file, 'r') as f:
        cur.copy_expert(sql=copy_sql, file=f)
        conn.commit()
        cur.close()

print("Inserting games.csv")
insert("data/games.csv", "game")

print("Inserting plays.csv")
insert("data/plays.csv", "play")

print("Inserting players.csv")
insert("data/players.csv", "player")

print("Inserting stadium_info.csv")
insert("data/stadium_info.csv", "stadium_info")

print("Inserting scores.csv")
insert("data/scores.csv", "scores")

# iterate over each week's CSV file and insert them
for i in range(1, 18): 
    print("Inserting week{i}".format(str(i)))
    insert("data/week{i}.csv".format(i=i), "tracking")

conn.close()
```

## Run your first query

> Now that you have all the data ingested, let's run your first aggregation query 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have all the data ingested, you can run the first aggregation query 
```

> and examine the results. For most of the example queries that follow throughout 
> the tutorial, you'll need to aggregate data from the `tracking` table, which 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and examine the results. For most of the example queries in this tutorial,
you'll need to aggregate data from the `tracking` table, which 
```

contains multiple rows per player for each play (because the data is sampled 
multiple times per second during each play)

### Number of yards run in game for passing plays, by player and game

This query sums all yards for each player in every game. You can then 

> join that on the `player` table to get player details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
join that on the `player` table to get player details:
```

```sql
SELECT t.player_id, p.display_name, SUM(dis) AS yards, t.gameid 
FROM tracking t
LEFT JOIN player p ON t.player_id = p.player_id 
GROUP BY t.player_id, p.display_name, t.gameid 
ORDER BY t.gameid ASC, yards DESC;
```
Your data should look like this:

> |player_id |        display_name         |       yards        |   gameid   |

Reviewer: You can remove the padding from the table (although I admit it looks prettier in raw like this!)

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is honestly just a copy/paste from the tool. I didn't feel like taking the time to _remove_ it. 😂

|-----------|-----------------------------|--------------------|------------|
|   2495454 | Julio Jones                 | 1030.6399999999971 | 2018090600|
|   2507763 | Mike Wallace                |  940.0099999999989 | 2018090600|
|   2552600 | Nelson Agholor              |  908.0299999999983 | 2018090600|
|   2540158 | Zach Ertz                   |  882.0899999999953 | 2018090600|
|   2539653 | Robert Alford               |  881.7599999999983 | 2018090600|
|   2555383 | Jalen Mills                 |  856.1199999999916 | 2018090600|

You might have noticed, however, that this data takes a long time to query because

> we have to aggregate every row in the `tracking` table in order to get the total

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we have to aggregate every row in the `tracking` table to get the total
```

yards of each player, in each game. That's a lot of work for PostgreSQL to do
when it needs to scan 20 million rows. On our small test machine this query 
often takes 25-30 seconds to run.

## Faster queries with continuous aggregates
Most of the data we were interested in are based on this aggregation of the 

> `tracking` data. We often needed to know how far a player traveled on each play

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`tracking` data. We wanted to know how far a player traveled on each play
```

or throughout each game. Rather than asking TimescaleDB to query and aggregate

> that raw data every time, we created a [continuous aggregate][] out of this base query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that raw data every time, we created a [continuous aggregate][cagg] out of this base query
```

I've noticed some problems when we use spaces in a ref link (see also L283)

to significantly improve the speed of queries and analysis.

### Create continuous aggregate of player yards per game

```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW player_yards_by_game
WITH (timescaledb.continuous) AS
SELECT t.player_id, t.gameid, t.position
	time_bucket(INTERVAL '1 day', t."time") AS bucket,
	SUM(t.dis) AS yards
FROM tracking t 
GROUP BY t.player_id, t.gameid, t.position, bucket;
```

> Once the continuous aggregate is created, modify the query to use this new 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you have created the continuous aggregate, modify the query to use the 
```

materialized data and notice the response time is now significantly faster, under
one second on our test machine.

```sql
SELECT pyg.player_id, p.display_name, SUM(yards) AS yards, pyg.gameid 
FROM player_yards_by_game pyg
LEFT JOIN player p ON pyg.player_id = p.player_id 
GROUP BY pyg.player_id, p.display_name, pyg.gameid 
ORDER BY pyg.gameid ASC, yards DESC;
```

> We'll use this continuous aggregate in many of the queries that follow in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll use this continuous aggregate in most of the queries in the
```

next section. Feel free to play with other variations of this materialized data
as you try to answer even more questions with TimescaleDB.

[kaggle-download]: https://www.kaggle.com/c/nfl-big-data-bowl-2021/data
[extra-download]: https://assets.timescale.com/docs/downloads/nfl_2018.zip

> [continuous aggregate]: /how-to-guides/continuous-aggregates/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[cagg]: /how-to-guides/continuous-aggregates/
```
